.TH GURB 8 "2025" "gurb" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
gurb \- Secure Boot lifecycle management for systemd\-boot under shim
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gurb
[\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR]
[\fB\-\-force\fR]
.I command
[\fIargs\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gurb
manages a Secure Boot setup where
.BR shimx64.efi (1)
chainloads a signed
.BR systemd\-boot (1)
binary (installed as
.IR grubx64.efi ),
which in turn loads Unified Kernel Images (UKIs) built by
.BR ukify (1)
via
.BR kernel\-install (8).
.PP
The package provides dummy satisfiers for GRUB's dpkg dependencies so that
.B shim\-signed
installs without pulling in GRUB.
Kernel installation is handled by
.BR kernel\-install (8)
rather than the legacy
.I /etc/kernel/postinst.d/dracut
hook, which is diverted to a no\-op.
.PP
All signing uses
.BR sbsign (1).
Key and certificate paths are read from
.IR /etc/kernel/uki.conf ,
so ukify and gurb always agree on which key to use.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B generate
Generate a new 4096\-bit RSA key and self\-signed certificate at the paths
configured in
.IR /etc/kernel/uki.conf .
The certificate subject is
.BI "O=gurb, CN=" hostname\ Secure\ Boot
with
.B extendedKeyUsage=codeSigning
and
.B CA:FALSE.
A DER copy is also written for use with
.BR mokutil (1).
Immediately calls
.B enroll
on completion.
Prompts before overwriting an existing key.
.TP
.B enroll
Import the DER certificate into the MokManager enrollment queue via
.BR "mokutil \-\-import" .
No\-op if the key is already enrolled or already pending.
A reboot is required after enrollment; MokManager will prompt for confirmation.
.TP
.B clean
List all MOK entries currently in NVRAM.
For each entry, checks whether any currently installed signed binary (shim,
mmx64, systemd\-boot, UKIs) was signed by that certificate.
Entries not used by any binary are offered for deletion one by one.
After processing, enrolls our MOK if it is not present.
.TP
\fBresign\fR \fIall\fR|\fIkver\fR
Re\-sign systemd\-boot and rebuild UKIs for the specified kernel version, or
all installed versions.
UKIs are rebuilt by calling
.B "kernel\-install add"
.I kver
.I /usr/lib/modules/kver/vmlinuz
which exercises the full normal build path (dracut initrd, ukify UKI, sbsign).
.br
Refuses to run unless the MOK is enrolled.
If the MOK is pending (enrolled but not yet confirmed in MokManager), refuses
unless
.B \-\-force
is given, with a warning that signatures will not validate until after reboot
and MokManager confirmation.
.TP
.B cmdline
Runs
.B "dracut \-\-print\-cmdline"
and appends
.B cmdline_extra
from the config file.
Shows a diff against
.I /etc/kernel/cmdline
and prompts before replacing it.
.TP
.B status
Prints a table of all managed binaries (shim, mmx64, systemd\-boot, all UKIs)
showing path, modification time, and signature status (SIGNED / SIGNED(other)
/ UNSIGNED / MISSING).
All binaries are checked without short\-circuiting.
.br
Also prints key and certificate details: CN, O, generation date, expiry, EKU,
and MOK enrollment state.
Warns if EKU is wrong or if the modsign OID is present (which causes shim to
reject the certificate).
Checks that the PEM and DER files match.
.br
Default command when invoked with no arguments.
.TP
.B bootentry
Creates an EFI NVRAM boot entry named
.B "shimmed systemd\-boot"
pointing to the shim binary.
The ESP device is auto\-detected from the shim path.
The entry is created without modifying
.BR BootOrder .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Print all actions that would be taken without executing any of them.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Allow
.B resign
to proceed even when the MOK is pending or not enrolled.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show a brief usage summary.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.SS /etc/kernel/uki.conf
This file is read by both
.BR ukify (1)
and
.BR gurb (8)
for signing key paths. The relevant keys under
.B [UKI]
are:
.TP
.B SecureBootPrivateKey
Path to the PEM private key used by
.BR sbsign (1).
.TP
.B SecureBootCertificate
Path to the PEM certificate.
.PP
The DER certificate (for
.BR mokutil (1))
is derived from the PEM path by replacing the
.B .pem
extension with
.BR .der .
.SS /etc/gurb/config
Optional. Key\-value pairs, one per line, in the form
.BR key=value .
No quoting or shell syntax. Recognised keys:
.TP
.B shim
Full path to
.I shimx64.efi
on the ESP.
All other ESP files (mmx64.efi, grubx64.efi) are placed in the same directory.
Default:
.IR /efi/EFI/systemd/shimx64.efi .
.TP
.B uki_dir
Directory where UKIs are stored on the ESP.
Default:
.IR /efi/EFI/Linux .
.TP
.B cmdline_extra
Extra tokens appended to the
.BR dracut (8)
cmdline output by the
.B cmdline
command.
Default: empty.
.SS Environment variables
The following environment variables override config file values:
.TP
.B GURB_SHIM
Overrides
.BR shim .
.TP
.B GURB_UKI_DIR
Overrides
.BR uki_dir .
.TP
.B GURB_CMDLINE_EXTRA
Overrides
.BR cmdline_extra .
.SH SECURE BOOT KEY NOTES
One key satisfies all three verification steps:
.IP 1. 3
.B shim
verifying systemd\-boot via the MOK database
.IP 2. 3
.B systemd\-boot
verifying UKIs via the ShimLock protocol (which delegates to shim)
.IP 3. 3
The
.B kernel
verifying module signatures
.PP
The certificate must have
.B extendedKeyUsage=codeSigning
and must
.I not
contain the modsign OID
.RB ( 1.3.6.1.4.1.2312.16.1.2 ).
Shim's
.I verify_eku()
function explicitly blacklists that OID: any certificate in MOK that contains
it will be rejected for EFI binary verification.
The kernel does not check EKU at all for module signing.
.PP
Canonical's signing certificate is compiled into the shim binary as
.I vendor_cert
and is not present in MOK NVRAM.
.SH FILES
.I /etc/gurb/config
.br
.I /etc/kernel/uki.conf
.br
.I /etc/kernel/install.conf
.br
.I /etc/kernel/install.d/05\-vmlinuz\-symlink.install
.br
.I /etc/kernel/postinst.d/zz\-gurb
.br
.I /etc/kernel/postrm.d/zz\-gurb
.br
.I /etc/kernel/postinst.d/dracut
(diverted from dracut package, replaced with exit\-0 no\-op)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR kernel\-install (8),
.BR ukify (1),
.BR dracut (8),
.BR sbsign (1),
.BR sbverify (1),
.BR mokutil (1),
.BR efibootmgr (8),
.BR bootctl (1),
.BR shim (8)
.SH BUGS
.B resign
rebuilds UKIs from scratch via
.BR kernel\-install .
If you only want to re\-sign an already\-built UKI with a new key without
rebuilding the initrd, use
.B sbsign
directly.
